Just on this one, I've met Conrad Peterson.
He came to select committee, and it's not-
No, it's not.
All right.
There you go then.
Hakeepa.
Just Hakeepa, is that right? That's good.
Like Cher. It's just Cher.
Sharon?
Cher.
C-H-E-R.
She just has Cher on her driver's license.
That's what-
You're picking somebody of the right generation for that.
That's what you prefer.
Yes. I just have-
Mm
... one legal name.
Yeah, so.
That's it.
Great. Now, what we'll do, so you've been here before.
I know we've--
So you know the process. So we've got 10 minutes.
You can take your
submission as read. Although, we'll just introduce ourselves.
I think you know us all. Greg O'Connor, the chair.
Greg Fleming, deputy chair. Kia ora.
Kia ora.
Paulo Garcia, New Lynn MP.
National MP for New Lynn.
And kia ora. I'm probably new to you. I'm Selia Wade-Brown.
I've taken over the role for the Greens in this committee.
Yes, yes. From the list. You're a list MP.
Yes, that's right. Based in the Wairarapa.
And you used to be the mayor of Wellington, I think.
Mm-hmm.
Yes.
All right. We'll start your 10 minutes from now.
Kia ora.
Okay.
I'm actually a little bit frazzled.
I was thinking about the last 10 minutes, whether to...
Because I had to stop myself from crying. I got interrogated out there by security.
Oh.
So, the last 10 minutes, I haven't even been thinking about this.
But we must push on.
Well, just feel relaxed.
Right.
What this committee tries to do is we go for an outcome.
Although we're all from different parties, it's actually one committee where we
try to leave our party affiliations at the door-
Mm
... and come for the recommendation that goes back as the best
outcome we can get.
Mm.
So given that context, just feel free to-
All right
... outline your concerns, and we'll ask you some questions,
and that's what we're trying to endeavor to do.
Yeah. And I want to just-
Especially if it's about us improving our own performance.
Right. And
as well as me, I can't just give up whenever
someone treats me
a certain way.
Mm.
Let's move on.
So I'm a little bit more frazzled and-
Have you got some water there?
Yes, yes. Oh, wow.
We'll get you-
Actually, I'll need some water
... get you a water.
So I'm here to give my views on my petition to
review the parliamentary petitions process
through my experience with direct engagement in this
process
since
the end of 2023.
Although I have done a few other, tried a few
petitions, 2011, 2018. Had no idea what I was doing.
So
I began to describe my mahi very
early on with a sense of pride as my volunteer mahi at New Zealand
Parliament.
Just to give you context. I've continued this journey with a desire
to learn and understand the process
and especially completing the written submission
step,
which
eventually I'd like to look at the stats with
how many actually do the written submission.
And
for me, I didn't even know that was part of it.
So every step
for me became empowerment.
Speaking
at the Justice Select Committee, I was pecking
myself. I really was. But that was such
a great experience for me, and you were so kind as well.
So empowerment turned to enjoyment, and this
time last year I started to ask,
how do I become more effective?
And
then
I began to look at my role as I'm a
parliamentary petitioner, a PP. My first term
for Ikaroa-Rāwhiti electorate. So
my lived experience with this process
and the steps just--
I began to understand it, which
made me feel really good and I enjoy this.
I would love to work at Parliament.
And I started to say that end of last year, like,
where did that come from?
Mm.
What's happening?
So,
my
two issues, two primary areas where
the gaps where I've seen, I've only mentioned two.
I thought I'd just only mention two.
Enabling petitioners to connect with others working on similar or
related issues,
and introducing a new minimum number of
supporting signatures.
So as a petitioner,
yeah,
it's been really frustrating seeing similar or even
other petitions, parliamentary petitions on the website that
I'm interested in. There's some good ones on there, and I can't even
contact them. I've tried. It's like Facebook.
So there are a lot of,
what I callWhat do I call them?
CDUs, current double-ups-
Mm
... which the petitions team are
familiar with.
So my recommendation I propose is to--
What do I propose?
Just a bit frazzled. For when we create the
submissions, that
it would be by consent in a box to tick yes or no-
Mm
... for an email address that will be there when the petition
goes live. Bada bing, bada boom. Then, yeah,
someone like myself will be like, "Oh, all right." Because I want to
help. I'm enjoying this. And I think
maybe many don't realize
just how enjoyable this process is, and
empowering. It really is.
And during this process, I've rebuilt my confidence.
I'm applying for a job this week, even.
Really?
Mm.
That's well done.
I know. So there are many benefits of
better parliamentary petitions
process because I'm seeing it from my
point of view. And to have more effective
petitions instead of
a mass amount, a lot, many.
So what did I write?
I've been a bit crook the last two days as well.
Mm.
And I'm not a public speaker, so
anyway.
You're doing well.
Yeah, I reckon.
Yeah. So the ease of access with
going into the next issue of only one signature.
Mm.
It's ease of access. It's democracy, so everyone can participate.
But that also means
a higher volume, and
the petition that went-- My petition at the end of last
year referred to the Police Minister was only 15. I think it was only 15.
But I also have learned it's all in timing as well, a lot of things as well,
I've cottoned on to. So
we don't need to-- The ease of access and only one,
there's an attitude from the people that we're not
taking it as serious as maybe we should.
And it's not there. It's like being in a workplace that says, "Here's the
bare minimum. Go for it." And everyone does the bare minimum.
It's the same sort of thing. And as a PP,
it's cool to create and make change.
Obviously, youse are here in the House.
And I feel like a part of the team. This is the other thing.
Mm.
I feel like we're a part of the team, and I want my area of the team
to be more effective. We put a lot of
pressure on MPs. "Be more effective.
Do your job." But also, I think we can also be a
bit more effective.
And just going on to
my recommendation
to
increase from one signature to 200.
Mm.
100 is not enough, and, say,
500 is too much. It's too high. And I sort of thought, well, 200
is just right because I'm
in that section of people where I don't have a lot of support.
Mm.
Anyway. And so I'm
not even on social media anymore. I love it. It's great.
I know, goodbye Facebook. What a waste of time.
Mm-hmm.
And look what I'm doing.
Yeah.
I think I'm being a little bit more efficient.
But
I'm enjoying this. So,
to increase from one signature to 200 is
going to be difficult for people in the
community,
including myself.
Mm.
Although I have rebuilt my confidence.
I would enjoy going out to get
signatures in person.
Two years ago, I'd be like, "No, I don't want to do that." So, there is
a process.
But the thing is, with a higher
minimum requirement, everyone's still, most
petitions
get through. They're
valid. The petitions team
work with the petitioners, and most of them become valid, unless they're
ridiculous.
Mm.
You know?
Can I just say, we're probably starting to get near the end of our
time.
Very good.
If you want to leave room for questions or observations from the-- Because we do
need to keep moving on this, because as you'll have seen, we have quite a bit to
get through on any Friday, any Thursday afternoon.
Thanks for that. I'll just-
But that said this morning, as we are coming to the end time, I presume you would
like to leave some room, time for questions.
Yeah. Yes, of course. Thanks. Great.
Sorry. Yes.
Yes, please. Yeah. First of all, thank you very much for this.
It's the first petition that we've had, which has given real practical suggestions
around how we can do better. So thank you very much.
It's out of your growing confidence and enjoyment of this.
You're sharing that with us, so thank you.
I like both suggestions. I'm keen for us to seriously
explore both of them. First one's pretty straightforward.
Just on the second one, when you chose the 200,
would you say that the main reason why you think there should
be a higher threshold to get through is so
that the committee themselves isn't receiving too many petitions?
That's the main reason?
It's both.
Okay.
It's both. It's a combination.
So it's that, and you also think the petitioner themselves, that the
process and their own thinking might be improved by having to go out there and
actually engage-
Yeah
... with a minimum of 200 people.
Yeah.
Something like that.
And I don't know the stats where how many know to do a written
submission and how many actually do one.
Right.
Because a lot of them are symbolic protests. I know.
Yeah.
Because my first ones were like, symbolic protests.
Okay.
So yeah, it is. It's
for people to go, "Hmm-Nah.
Yeah, I think-
But still, anyone can still access it.
Yeah. That's great. Thank you very much.
Thank you. I have two quick questions.
One, and I think it's wonderful that you're looking...
It's a relatively new process for us, so I'm sure there can be improvements.
Whether these are the right ones or not, I don't know.
But
one thing that you didn't mention is sometimes you've got
one person that's got several petitions running at the same time.
Now, it may well be that that person's got several really good ideas, but
one way of reducing it might be say, you
can have another petition when this one has been presented, but maybe one at a time
might be a thought.
Exactly.
The other one-
I agree
... and that's not a policy position, it's just something-
It could be
... I'm just floating. But the other one was that sometimes, as
I understand it,
a petition has been started under a quite different process.
OPPs.
And then, thanks, that's the word. And then it gets brought to here.
Mm.
So then it technically only needs one
signature.
No, that's a good point.
That's why I don't think that I... I'm sympathetic to the idea.
Well, there's Green Party petitions on a number of things,
and then eventually-
Right
... then sometimes we choose to present them.
But there would be action stations or this, that, or the other.
There's plenty of other organizations do petitions, and then they find
either they-
The email gathering ones. Those ones.
OPPs, other petition platforms.
Or just to show strengths of opinion.
But they-
And they do
... do them in a more branded way, and then they come here.
Mm-hmm.
And I'm not sure we would want to stop that-
No
... being a mechanism.
No. I want to make that clear.
Yeah.
They're great,
but the members of the house who
don't even follow the parliamentary rule, the OPPs
are great, and to bring them in, but
many of them are zero signatures for parliamentary petition instead of just
do one. Like, I mentioned Chloe Swarbrick because I had to
find, where's a MP that's actually one?
And she was the first one I had to search to find because there's zero, zero,
zero.
Mm.
And I'm all about the other petition
platforms. They're great. There's 5,000. She brought one with 5,000.
But she was one of the few that actually made sure there was one
signature. The rest are zero.
And maybe we could also know how many there were.
All right. That's good. Look, we're well over
time now, but I think you've left us, and I'd generally say that those
ideas are ones that you can see that you've probably got
universal agreement on. The process will be how
the Standing Orders Committee is the next step.
But we'll certainly be reporting back-
Mm
... on
your petition-
Mm, mm
... and that. So thank you very much.
It's much appreciated, and these are the thoughtful ones-
Mm.
.. particularly where it's about improving our own performance.
So thank you very much